# Results 

Data files for all biomarker data extracted (manually and programmatically) from target resources: OpenTargets (https://www.opentargets.org/), GWAS Catalog (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/), ClinVar (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar/), MarkerDB (https://markerdb.ca/), and OncoMX (https://data.oncomx.org/allbiomarkers). The data extracted and mapped directly or inferred into this database is preliminary.

Molecular biomarker data was extracted from downloaded data tables of targeted resources: OpenTargets, MarkerDB, ClinVar and GWAS Catalog. Several data types that mapped into the data model were leveraged to extract additional contextual data such as, LOINC codes, disease ontology ID, specimen_type, Uberon IDs, and assessed_entity_type (e.g., gene, metabolite, glycan). For example, rsIDs were extracted from downloaded data tables for each target resource and mapped directly into the main_Xref data type of the data model. The rsIDs also mapped directly into the assessed_biomarker_entity where they defined the specific genetic mutation located in the named gene (“rsXXXXX mutation in GeneXYZ”). The specific gene symbol in the target data table was also extracted and directly mapped into the assessed_biomarker_entity field. Acquisition of rsIDs also allowed simple inferences of the assessed_entity_type (i.e.,”gene”), the biomarker_status (“presence of”), and the best_biomarker_type (“risk”). The best_biomarker_type could also be inferred as “risk” since these mutations can be used to determine risk of cancer when detected. Data for gene or protein name/accession, amino acid change, mutation, and genome build, were captured directly from the resources, when available. Diseases associated with biomarker entries were extracted from the target data tables and directly mapped into the condition_name field as a matched Disease Ontology term and ID (DOID). To map loinc_codes, the extracted gene symbol was used to parse through the LOINC database to find relevant codes that were then mapped into the data model. The LOINC table also provided the tissue in which the biomarker could be measured and mapped directly into specimen_type (i.e., blood, amniotic fluid, etc.), which also allowed mapping of an ID from the Uberon Ontology into specimen_type. Data for loinc_codes and specimen_type, however, could not be mapped occasionally into the biomarker data model when the data did not exist in the LOINC database or in the Uberon Ontology.

Gene name was extracted from OpenTarget data tables and mapped directly into assessed_biomarker_entity. UniProtKB identifiers were also mapped directly from the source into the notes data type as supplemental information and detail for the biomarker database. OpenTarget also often provided the specific amino acid change in a gene product associated with an rsID.  This information was mapped into the notes section of the data model as additional contextual information. From MarkerDB, extracted gene symbols were used to map gene names to assessed_biomarker_entity via gene names mapped from a UniProtKB data table of gene symbols, gene names, and IDs. The UniProtKB ID was then mapped into the notes field of the data model. Specific changes and mutations were also mapped into the notes section when these data were specified. From GWAS Catalog, extracted gene symbols were used to map gene names to the assessed_biomarker_entity; the gene name was mapped from a UniProtKB table of gene symbols, gene names, and ID. The UniProtKB ID was also mapped into the notes section. In some instances, a biomarker entity or a rsID from GWAS catalog was linked to multiple diseases. In these cases, the biomarker/rsID was entered in the data model as a distinct entity associated with one disease instance. In other cases, multiple biomarkers/rsIDs were associated with one disease. In these cases, each biomarker/rsID instance was entered in the data model as a distinct entity associated with each distinct disease instance. From ClinVar, the extraction of a gene symbol was used to map the gene name to assessed_biomarker_entity. The gene name was mapped from a UniProtKB data table of gene symbols, gene names, and ID. The UniProtKB ID was also mapped into the notes section. For data from ClinVar, in some instances multiple diseases were associated with one biomarker entity or rsID. In these cases, the biomarker was entered in the data model as a distinct entity associated with one of each designated disease instance. In other cases, multiple biomarkers/rsIDs were associated with one disease. In these cases, each biomarker/rsID instance was entered in the data model as a distinct entity associated with each distinct disease instance. Specific changes, mutations, and accessions to these mutations/changes were also mapped into the notes section, when specified.Data from OncoMX was mapped directly into the data model, since the data was already in the format of the biomarker data model. Data from OncoMX was not limited to gene data, so different biomarker entities are observed along with different best_biomarker_type and biomarker_status. The data from this resource was manually curated.
